.TH dmk2jv3 1
.SH Name
dmk2jv3 \- Convert a DMK floppy disk image file to JV3 format
.SH Syntax
.B dmk2jv3 [options] filename.dmk [filename.dsk]
.SH Description
The dmk2jv3 program converts a floppy disk image in the DMK format to
the JV3 format.  Both these formats were originally developed for
TRS-80 Model I/III/4/4P emulators, though the DMK format is useful
more broadly.  This converter is needed because some older emulators
and tools do not support DMK but do support JV3.

The DMK format is more general than JV3; it can represent error
conditions and other properties of the original disks that are not
representable in the JV3 format.  The converter prints an error
message whenever an important property of the DMK image cannot be
represented in the JV3 image, but when possible, it continues the
conversion.  Some less important properties of the DMK format are
silently lost, such as the exact width and content of inter-sector
gaps.

A few features of the JV3 format that were added as extensions to the
original definition are not supported by some emulators.  The
converter uses these extensions when needed, but prints a warning
message.

For more information about
the DMK and JV3 file formats and the emulators that use them, see:
.nf
    http://discover-net.net/~dmkeil/
    http://www.tim-mann.org/xtrs.html
.fi
.SH Options
If only filename.dmk is given on the command line, filename.dsk is
formed by deleting any extension from filename.dmk and appending ".dsk".
.TP
.B \-v \fIverbosity\fP
Specify how much output is printed.  Larger numbers select more output.
The default setting is 1.
.RS
.TP
0
No output except for error messages.
.TP
1
Also print warning messages.
.TP
2
Also print the sector numbers found.  Print a "?" after each sector
recorded with a CRC error.
.SH Diagnostics
.TP
.B dmk2jv3: Error reading from DMK file
The DMK file could not be read.
.TP
.B dmk2jv3: File is not in DMK format
The specified input file was not in DMK format.
.TP
.B dmk2jv3: Error writing to JV3 file
The JV3 file could not be written.
.TP
.B dmk2jv3: JV3 does not support RX02 encoding
DMK files of disks written in the DEC RX02 format cannot be converted
to JV3 format at all.  No JV3 file is written.
.TP
.B Too many total sectors
The extended JV3 format has a limit of 5802 total sectors.
Any sectors beyond this are not written to the JV3 file.
.TP
.B Warning: too many total sectors for some emulators
The original JV3 format has a limit of 2901 total sectors.
Sectors beyond this point are written to the JV3 file, but some
emulators will not be able to read them.
.TP
.B Track number xx too large, using yy
The JV3 format can only record track numbers less than 255.
Track 255 is written to the JV3 file with track number 254.
.TP
.B Sector size code xx too large, using yy
The extended JV3 format can only record sector size codes 0 (128
bytes) through 3 (1024 bytes).  The JV3 is written with the
higher-order bits of the size code masked off.
.TP
.B Warning: sector size xx not supported by some emulators
The original JV3 format can only record sectors of size 256.
The sector is recorded at its correct size, but the resulting
JV3 will not work with some emulators.
.TP 
.B Single density DAM xx not supported, using yy
.PD 0
.TP
.B Double density DAM xx not supported, using yy
.PD
The JV3 format can support only a limited range of data address marks.
.TP
.B False track number xx not supported
The JV3 format requires the logical track number recorded in a
sector's id to match the true physical track number.  The true
physical track number is recorded on the JV3 in place of the false
one.  The result will probably not work as desired.  This error is
typical of many copy-protected disks.
.TP
.B Warning: False side number xx not supported, using yy
.PD 0
.TP
.B Side number xx too large, using yy
.PD
The JV3 format requires the logical side number recorded in a
sector's id to match the true physical side number (0 or 1).  The JV3 
is written with the true side number.  This is generally not a problem 
unless the false side number was part of a copy-protection scheme.
.TP
.B Recording ID CRC error as data CRC error
The JV3 format has no way to indicate that a sector ID has a CRC
error, so we record this condition as if it were a data CRC error.
.TP
.B Recording missing DAM as data CRC error
The JV3 format has no way to indicate that a sector ID has no matching
data address mark, so we record this condition as if it were a data CRC error.
.SH Author
dmk2jv3 was written by Timothy Mann <tim@tim-mann.org>.
dmk2jv3 is free software, released under the GNU General Public License.
Thanks to David Keil for designing and
documenting the DMK file format for floppy disk images,
and to Jeff Vavasour for designing and documenting the JV3 format.

$Id: dmk2jv3.man,v 1.6 2004/05/30 08:53:03 mann Exp $

